
---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: Donald Blais <0blaisde@gmail.com>
Date: Thu, Mar 19, 2026 at 4:09 AM
Subject: Re: UT Austin Computation Center and Photograph Collection
To: Clive Dawson <clivedaw@gmail.com>, Noah H Smith <noahhsmith@utexas.edu>
Cc: Richard Denney <rdenney@utexas.edu>, Rich Cohen <cohen@texas.email>


Hi Clive and others,

My start at the DEC-10 site in HRC was 10 hr/wk as a student employee in
January 1980.  David Phillips hired me.  It let me return to school to
complete my BA after The University banned indoor smoking.  I worked
additional hours at the Advanced Graphics Lab in the Engineering Science
Building with Marg Knox's group.  My work hours varied by semester.
Later I acquired hours at the IBM site in Graduate School of Business.

Here are staff people I think I remember...


DEC-10 people in 1980:

Blais, Donald
Boyd, Robert
Cizmar, Dawn
Culp, George
Dawson, Clive
Denney, Richard
Harlow, Kathleen
Joseph, Mildred
Loomis, Thomas
Mooney, Rickey
Otken, John
Phillips, David
Simmons, Norma
Watkins, G Morgan
Wyche, C Cecil


DEC-10 people prior to my arrival:

Difelice, Lewis
Watson, Richard
(? Cox, C Lano ?)


DEC-10 / Academic DEC-20 additional people after 1980.

Desai, Nandkishore "Nandu"
Jimenez, Carlos
Donald Kassebaum
Merworth, Boyd
Nettle, P Kay
Padgett, Stephen
Rissmeyer, Carla


Research DEC-20 (in Painter Hall)

Blais, Donald
Brown, William
Dawson, Clive
Galvin, Peter
Karimi, Ezat


I've forgotten the chronology for many people.  Apologies if misplaced.

Dawn Cizmar was manager of one or both of the DEC-20s for a time, after
David Phillips, maybe immediately before Don Kassebaum became manager.

I knew Helen-Jo Jakusz Hewitt by the palindromic HJJH.

Tommy Loomis worked out of LRC office space at a time after his DEC-10 /
DEC-20 days.  He possibly worked directly for a German company.

There was a lineprinter printout containing the names of DEC-10 staff
members from before my arrival, on a wall as art, possibly in the front
office / party room where Norma Simmons was located.  The names
interlocked in crossword puzzle fashion.  The only name unknown to me
was Difelice.  I later learned it was Lewis Difelice.  I think Rick
Watson's time at the DEC-10 was also before my arrival.  I have a vague
feeling that Lano Cox had worked at the DEC-10 at some time but it may
be a false memory.

Peter Galvin & Carla Rissmeyer came to Austin from southern New England
and were hired after Clive went to MCC.  Later they returned to NE.

Computer users including staff members had alphanmeric identifiers which
were printed on the front page of their lineprinter output.  A few lucky
people had IDs which reflected their initials.

The ones I think I remember are...

CCCD001 Clive Dawson
CCDP001 David Phillips
CCLC001 Lano Cox

For the DEC-10 office layout, I remember the northernmost west wall
office as being occupied by Rich Denney in January 1980.

There was an external office, which I thought of as the short-course
office, at the NW corner with its only door opening to the HRC hallway.
That office may have been associated with the Computation Center rather
than with the DEC-10 space.  It's where I first met Mildred Joseph.