kentucky mystery 😄 'stan bartsch' ring any bells? 🤔
jakydude — Yesterday at 19:47
https://www.linkedin.com/in/stanbartsch
hmm the name doesn’t ring a bell.  i looked up his linked in profile.  assuming the above is correct, i don’t recognize his picture. 
what’s the context?  is it in the history above?
Noah — Yesterday at 19:48
cool! yep agreed!
Inspired by DECWAR, a game was written on a PDP-11 system in Kentucky called D.I.S.K. back in the early 1980's. It was created by Stan Bartsch. I don't have much info on this game, but it was updated and ported to Unix in 1985 ...
https://www.galcon.com/classic/history.html
jakydude — Yesterday at 19:49
well seems like we could have crossed paths.  if so, i don’t remember now.
Noah — Yesterday at 19:51
eric - thinking would be nice to invite him in here or something like that - some kinda socials - looks like very interesting guy to talk to 👍
Eric — Yesterday at 20:10
Well was wondering if that was part of the effort by the uky folks, what were their names, David Herron? Sean or Wayne something?
that may be a different effort
i dont htink they need to be here ,but would be good to contact and ask them what they remember for resarch
Joel,  telnet decwarjs.com    it should be a lot further along now
jakydude — Yesterday at 20:15
yeah certainly possible i should remember him.  his linked in profile says he went to UofL.  i knew folks there as the DEC-10 was based there.  but the unix days afterwards with Sean and Herron were all UK. 
i will check out decwarjs.com as soon as i have a keyboard.  just a phone for another week.  i am very excited though!!
Eric — Yesterday at 20:56
what was sean's last name
jakydude — Yesterday at 20:56
casey
Eric — Yesterday at 20:56
right
this might work for you on phone  http://decwarjs.com:8090/
was it david herron?  I remmeber kinda two david's i think
like one rand that ATT computer lab and the other was connected to the mainframe center (what was that called?)
jakydude — Yesterday at 20:59
yeah that works.  i could have used telnet too but playing decwar is kinda hard on a phone.  i am in.  it looks cool.
Eric — Yesterday at 20:59
yea for sure
jakydude — Yesterday at 21:00
yeah david herron for sure.  he went to microsoft in late 80s.  probably has an island somewhere.  bill stoll is another.  he wrote uniwar.  went to at&t in the late 80s.  not sure about another david.
jakydude — Yesterday at 21:02
ken kubota, bill stoll, and eric herrin ran that AT&T lab in the classroom building.  there were some other folks too but can’t remember all of them.  i ended up running that lab later when it was a NeXT lab. 
by mainframe center so you mean mcvey?  where the tvi910s were?  pr1me system, ibm 360, etc? 
after i was banned from there i lost touch with those folks
eric herrin and david herron are not related - looks like i made a typo but not the case 
Eric — Yesterday at 21:05
eric herrin! that is the ATT guy and he other was like David Herron or something?
Def knew of Ken, trying to think of who bill was
who was that woman that worked there, i think she used to be on you didn't she
NeXT lab would have been cool
mainframe = mcvey, yea
jakydude — Yesterday at 21:06
david herron may have been involved with the AT&T lab but i met him when i started work at math sciences over in the patterson office tower.  we ran the systems for CS, math, and stat departments.  eric herrin and ken kuhota as well.
Eric — Yesterday at 21:06
in my time i remember pr1me and 360, i don't reacll the exact terminal type
i think it was Eric who did the AT&T
over in patternson office tower? no no, it was that classroom building next to it i think
if i'm remembering correctly
jakydude — Yesterday at 21:08
over at mcvey lavine thrillkill (think i have that spelled right) was likely the person you are thinking of
Eric — Yesterday at 21:08
what was that woman's name
that is it i think!
jakydude — Yesterday at 21:08
eric was in the AT&T lab then moved to patterson
Eric — Yesterday at 21:09
https://www.legacy.com/us/obituaries/staugustine/name/lavine-thrailkill-obituary?id=25877205
Legacy.com
Lavine Thrailkill Obituary (1928-2006) - St. Augustine, FL - St. Au...
View Lavine Zauche Thrailkill's obituary, send flowers and sign the guestbook.
Image
jakydude — Yesterday at 21:09
kevin solie took over the lab (in the classroom building) from eric 
yeah that’s her
i remember asking for “password change” privileges on my dad’s dec-10 account.  and lavine said no one should be allowed to change their passwords.  it was a different time. 
