

---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: Noah H Smith <noahhsmith@utexas.edu>
Date: Tue, May 5, 2026 at 4:02 AM
Subject: Re: [DecwarOrg Blog] New comment on The First Internet Computers In Texas.
To: Clive Dawson <clivedaw@gmail.com>
Cc: Richard Denney <rdenney@utexas.edu>


Hi Clive, yes, hahaha this is a wonderful bunch of topics that we need to explore in the blog, dissertation, and maybe with RichD and TCHC blog as well!:) I will cc RichD here so he can see these initial notes. Rich and me are already also kicking around some ideas about exploring the UT and Schlumberger topics as well, which seems at least somewhat parallel to the below (80s AI wave, etc).

So there's MCC Corporation and the Strategic Computing Initiative story in the 80s (Bobby Inman, SDI, Japan Inc, etc).
And then there's MCC the building, which all the Domain shoppers these days have probably noticed, hahaha:)
And then there's Center for Space Research (Aerospace Department, Hans Mark somewhat like Bobby Inman, SDI stuff, etc)

So for MCC Corp, most of what little I myself know comes from the excellent book The Brain Makers which discusses probably many of the major legends (largest concentration of LISP machines in the world, fountains in front to camouflage conversation from spies, etc). My one little connection is mentoring a high school student there before she left for MIT, and her father was an MCC Corp vet. Can't remember many details of what she told me about him but will probly come back over time, and can contact her again for an interview.

Next let's jump to CSR because this will make things easier to understand. CSR became official around 1980 but really stretched back to around 1970. It was closely associated with the CDC Cyber and the Crays. At first it was in the fun building just to the north-east of I35 and 26th street with a round stairwell that contained a Foucault Pendulum. This is where I first encountered CSR around 1990. Lots of VAX hardware there. Then it moved to the office building at 3200 Red River in the 90s. And then into the MCC building around 2000(?) where it still is. CSR has basically the whole level right above the ground floor. There are some other startup style companies up in the higher regions. Liked to go up there and poke around in the dark and abandoned feeling areas:) There were still locked areas and military style people up there in the 2000s. No idea what was going on. Definitely people working on wireless comms up there! And there was the UT commercialization lawyers down on the ground floor, talked to them a few times. I was mostly in one of the windowless labs in the core with a bunch of noisy racks for several years at first, but for the last years had a nice office in the south-west corner with a great view over the trees toward the city:) Liked that office, second best ever had, best was top floor north east corner office of the old ESB building:)

So guess that's already discussed most of what I know for MCC the building. It's actually quite surprising that the name MCC lives on! Ahha, I remember hearing rumors around 2010 that it was going to be torn down and replaced, and that CSR was going to need to move again! Maybe across to the main Pickle campus? Yuck. One of the nice things about MCC was the little wooded parkland setting, and there were nice stream beds in there that am guessing RichD knows a bit about! Loved to go for walks in the cedars there. Was not happy hearing those rumors, but ended up moving to Germany for my daughter in 2014!:) So for myself, I could and did live without a car mostly. Bicycle was more than enough. Stayed in the hood near Wheatsville, Ney House, Mothers Cafe, and bicycled down to the Springs and Deep Eddy. Returning to that is definitely the plan when I return in July 2027 (yes it's official now, paperwork is official with my company:) The only time when I had to have a car was that period with CSR at MCC! So had a 1963 Mercury Meteor, nice ride!:)

Cheers,
Noah


On Mon, May 4, 2026 at 8:22 PM Clive Dawson <clivedaw@gmail.com> wrote:
Hi Noah,

I assume you meant that you worked at the MCC building from 2003-14, right?  Because MCC the corporation was gone by 2000.  After that the building was used as a startup incubator, as I recall.  My son was a research assistant for UT’s Institute for Advanced Technology for some of those years.

Cheers,

Clive

On May 3, 2026, at 9:34 AM, Noah Smith <noreply-comment@blogger.com> wrote:

Noah Smith has left a new comment on the post "The First Internet Computers In Texas":

Beautiful!!! Thanks for this Clive:) I always dreamed of going to the surplus sales at Pickle, but never once did it. Even despite working at MCC from 2003 to 2014, hahaha! You got to live the dream, and beyond the dream really. Please keep that AN-20, hope to be seeing it in the not too distant future:)

Post a comment.

Unsubscribe to comments on this post.

Posted by Noah Smith to DecwarOrg Blog at May 3, 2026, 9:34 AM
