
https://youtu.be/_k65EfThe_U

00:00:00
all through the 70s, from 1971 through the rest of the 70s, there were a lot of star trek computer games, and many of these happened at ut. so, so ut played a very special role all through the 70s and you know, an interesting question is why, why that happened. um, we won't, we won't go too far into that. what we can say is that around the mid70s there was a,

00:00:37
a really good star trek game at ut and the new thing that happened is that some people thought, we can do it multiplayer and it's, it's quite amazing that they went from single player to two player, and then they went to 18 player. that was decwar. so 18 players is a lot, right? and, and for, for things from that era, when you you're suddenly thrown in with 18 other players, it was quite overwhelming and quite uh mind-blowing to see this and to interact with 18 other people.

00:01:20
so early 80s the decwar started to spread really around the globe and i got as a 15 year old teenager, i got very lucky to get to play decwar in san marcos so not at ut that was down in san marcos at the time it was called swt, southwest texas state university and they had a, they had a deck 10 there.

00:01:50
i got to play decwar there. so, that was my, that was my experience. um, how much should we want more to say about it right now? let's, let's go on to the other questions and we'll fill in some more of the gaps. so, here we go. now, okay, that the question is the original people that worked on decwar and, and made decwar. so, this was in the 70s. these, these people were 10 years older than me.

00:02:21
i've never met any of them and it's amazing that we have very little information about them and from them and we hope to, to uncover some of that. we're, we're kind of being archaeologists and part of what we're, part of what we're interested in is finding out about these people and like telling the story, right? so, as i said, um the, the star trek games kind of developed around mid70s, right?

00:02:57
and the first star trek game was a single player game. and we, we have some names for some people at ut that were involved with all of that. so i'm just going to name some name grady hicks, jim korp. this was actually 1973. in 1974, dave matuszek and paul reynolds. so they developed the, the single player game. and a little bit later, the later the two player game. and there we have the name robert schneider.

00:03:28
right. so that's that's like four or five names. now we get to 1978 and decwar. all right. and we have two definite names there, bob hysick and jeff potter. so bob hysick and jeff potter actually created decwar. they were the ones that jumped it from single player, two-player to 18 player on the pdp10, on the deck 10. they wrote it in fortran and assembly.

00:03:58
so we know that bob hysick wrote the assembly, and jeff potter wrote the fortran. they, they split it up that way. so they split the code. um we know we have a, we have a little bit of information from bob hik, but but all of these people, you know, we're, we're hoping to be in, in contact with them, and to, to learn more about their stories, and record that with all of the other work we're doing on decwar. we, we would be really excited to, to learn more about uh the original people.

00:04:37
um i should, i should, i should skip a little bit forward then. okay, this is different from the people that created decwar. okay, let's skip on to the people that kind of saved decwar, and preserved it over these 40 years, because it it really did almost vanish. it almost we almost lost it. all right. so, there are two, there are two people that are kind of the heroes that saved it.

00:05:12
um, harris newman and merlyn cousins. all right. i have to bring their names in immediately along with the original creators. they, they saved the game. and this happened around all through the 90s, the 2000s, but um the big event was in 2011. harris and merlyn were able to put the code onto the internet on github, where it was accessible, right?

00:05:45
so, for the first time on github, you could get your hands onto decwar from 2011, and we have we have harris and merlyn to thank for that. did decwar need to be saved? well, you know, in the in the in the 80s and 90s, the internet was still primitive. and there were there were people that were on the internet looking for decwar, and beyond the internet out in the physical world like looking for the tapes, printouts, anything.

00:06:19
um, i was one of those people. so i was i was always kind of watching. i was on the lookout, right? but the real hero is harris. harris newman. he he was very persistent. he he was really, you know, trying to get a hold of decwar. what happened is in 1995, someone sent him an email and we don't know who it was.

00:06:51
it's a mystery person. there was a mystery email in 1995 that had compucerve's version of deckar attached to it in the email. so if that had not happened, we would not have deckar. now was trying to preserve the original email, right? but it's been a long time. he had it on discs and stuff and he moved he moved from austin to portland, and he can't find the discet, or whatever it is now.

00:07:21
he can't find that email anymore, and i wonder even if we had that email, you know, would we be able to trace really who had sent it? serve was a very big company at the time. compuserve was a very big company. compuserve is like facebook today. it was a a giant uh networking provider. and you know, in a way, compuserve kind of stole decwar from ut. and then in 1995, we were fortunate to get decwar back from compuserve.

00:08:02
we only really know about bob hysick. he's in, he's living in chicago. he's probably close to retirement, or or already retired. um, you know, he's in, he's in it, of course, and we can, we can guess that all of the people throughout this story are it people. um, the other person we know a little bit is, is uh dave matuszek. he, he worked on the the single player star trek game. um, he does interact with some people and so he, he's still active in some ways.

00:08:36
we haven't made contact with him because, yeah, there's really a big divide between the mid 70s single player and then the 1978 18 player. so they were on, they were on completely different machines. um, very different, very different code, right? um, and i i just want to mention that single player star trek was super popular worldwide.

00:09:08
like when you got into computer games, you basically always played a single player star trek game. there were many variants, right? it was, it was, it was one of the most common computer games in the 70s and 80s. so, that that's kind of a whole another world. that's kind of a whole another world. um, for decwar, yeah, we we've got bob hysick who's out there and harris and merlyn who are, who are very active.

00:09:41
so, definitely the story's, the story is even a little bit more complicated. so, the the question is what, what's the place of the mit space war game in this whole story? it's, it's even a more complicated story. so, space war was developed around 62 at mit. it was a video game, very much like we imagine a video game to be. it was so far ahead of its time.

00:10:13
it was, it looked like asteroids, right? that's the closest way to describe it. if you, if you've seen asteroids, you know what space war looked like. it was so far ahead of its time that it was the first real video game in history. space war was huge. it had a huge impact. anybody that saw it or knew about it was in awe of space war. so it it changed the world. space war changed the world.

00:10:45
it had to run on very special hardware though, very special machines that very few people had access to. you know, basically mit, stanford, places like this, right? there were, it was a pdp1, not a pdp10. one came with a, a video display that was based on an old radar display. so it was a, it was a radar display from the sage um, like continental defense system from the 50s.

00:11:15
all right. so these were very rare devices. they were very expensive. um yeah, there was, there was, there was. there was a few hundred pdp ones, and and you know, very fortunate people got to see space war back in the day.

00:11:35
but people tried to simulate space war on other machines. this was immediately what happened all through the 60s is people trying to simulate space war. all right. then in in the late 60s star trek was on tv, and they were like, ah, yeah, i'm going to try to simulate space war on my hardware, but i'm going to make it more like star trek than it already was, because it was already very much like star trek, but they were like, i'm going to have the i'm going to have the enterprise. i'm going to have the klingons. i'm going to have the federation, right? so they they started mashing space war together with star trek.

00:12:10
all right. that's when the star trek games started. and the the first one was 1971. so almost 10 years after space war, there was a game called star trek in southern california. the next year, 1972 or sorry, 1973, two years later, it was already at ut. there was already a star trek at ut. it looked nothing like space war.

00:12:42
so, space war, you had to have an old radar tube display. star trek was text only. it was only text. so, no fancy video game, no asteroids effect. it was just text. most people's hardware could do text. and this is why they were like, oh, i'm going to simulate space war, and i'm going to make it like star trek, but all i have is text. i don't have a fancy radar tube display, right?

00:13:14
i don't have a piece of the old sage continental defense system around. i have to do it in text. they played it on teletypes, so it wasn't even video displays. it was a typewriter output. so you typed on a typewriter thing, and it printed it out on a teletype. um, so yeah, 1973, star trek was already at ut, right? so two two years after it was invented, kind of 10 11 12 years after space war,

00:13:46
there were teletypes at ut where you could play star trek and like fly the enterprise, and fight the klingons, right this is what became, you know, this this 1975 star trek game, dave matuszek then it changed into the two-player game which was still on a teletype, this is how primitive things were, the the two-player game. the two players took turns at a teletype.

00:14:17
so, player one would sit at the teletype, type in some stuff, it would it would print some stuff on the paper, then player two would sit there and type some stuff in. that's why the uh the deckore guys were like, all right, we're going to go to this fancy new hardware, the, the pdp10. you know, it's like almost 20 years after the pdp1, getting close to 20 years later, the original pdp-1 space war game. now, we jump up to the pdp10 with decwar and 18 players.

00:14:52
and you could play it on a teletype, but most people played it on what we think of as a terminal. so, it looked normal to us. it was on a terminal. um, it was still text based though, keep that in mind. it was text based. it was not it was not asteroids graphics. it was it was all text. so at the so 1978, all right, when when they started working on decwar on the pdp10 on the deck 10, i can remember 1978.

00:15:27
i was 10 years old in 1978. so, so i know what it was like. so, um, many of the things from the 60s like the vietnam war and the moon landings, they were history already in 1978, and people people were kind of trying to forget about them in a way, right? like espec especially the war and we can say that the moon landings yeah, people were still very excited about space people still expected to live in space like maybe 10 years from now, right?

00:16:07
like, yeah, sure, i'll be living in space. this was this was normal to think this, right? you know, people expected to to go into space so, um, star trek kind of captured that right? people could kind of imagine experiencing something vaguely like star trek. like, yeah, i could be living in space. stuff like that could happen. it was imaginable. now, you don't imagine that at all. it's totally alien. so, the main thing about star trek was, it was partly a lot of fun, and it was an escape.

00:16:43
you know, it was good to get away from what was going on, and it was very positive. star trek was all they made a point of making it a positive message that, yeah, we're going to explore space, and meet strange people and all of that stuff. it, it was always a positive message. so, the game, the game is kind of positive. the game is kind of funny. there's, there's humor in there. there's funny messages, right? it's funny, and then it's kind of serious, too. it's very competitive. it's very competitive. extremely competitive.

00:17:14
so, yeah. let's leave out that for now. so again, let make it clear. i never worked on decwar back in the day. i was too young, when i first started, when i first played decwar, i was 15, 1983. i was already interested in computers, and that's how i got to play decwar at 15 in 1983. i was already interested in computers, but i was much more interested in science.

00:17:47
i already knew i wanted to be an astronomer, and i became an astronomer. so at ut, i studied astronomy, and i did that for a while. then i switched to aerospace engineering. so again, space space related things, right? so, i got a phd in aerospace engineering at ut and since then, i've gone into industry and basically i'm, you know, i work on computers. pretty sophisticated computer projects in industry.

00:18:25
now, i do think decwar had a big impact on all that. hen i first encountered it, the internet was was just like a gleam on the horizon, but experiencing 18 other people all playing and having fun on the computer, having a lot of fun, like very rowdy, like you could hear people yelling, crying, like it's very exciting. this made computers very friendly for me.

00:18:57
uh, like a very safe space, like i escaped from the world, i realized that they were they were a good space to be in. so yeah, ever after that, working with computers was totally natural. it was, it was the way to go. yeah. i was an early player. that's true. 1983. decwar really became what we know today around 1980 1981.

00:19:34
so within two or three years this 15 year-old kid got to play it in san marcos. that was me. so yeah, i was extremely lucky. again, you know, it it's very much like the people in 1962 or whatever that got to experience space war on the pdp1. not a lot of people got to do that, right? a small number of people got to do it. a lot of people heard about it though, because it was so incredible, right?

00:20:08
and, and deckar was similar. so there was, there was a lot of like well, you know, right after that, so soon after that, decwar went on to compuserve compuserve kind of stole decwar from ut and like i say, compuiserve was kind of like the facebook of the day, so it was a very popular game on compuserve, and many people got to play it then. okay, this is a great story. so, so the question is how are we, how are we simulating decwar today, and you know what kind of work is being done with decwar right now.

00:20:46
so, the first thing we have to say is that at the event that's coming up next month, you're going to see eric freeman's decwar.js, which is a, is a simulation of decwar based on the latest greatest technology. and this is fantastic. so, so you know, eric and i work together, you know, we're trying to help each other. eric is, is really pushing pushing the technology to, to the present day.

00:21:20
and what you're going to see at the event is some fantastic stuff. right. at the same time, there's a whole group of people that are what i, what i call going backwards. i'm one of those people. so, i am going backwards, so we we we have an old original decwar working on a simulation of the old original hardware. that's what i work on. the code, the code is very close now to what was actually at ut in, let's say, 1981.

00:22:01
i want to go further backwards. i want to go, i i'm looking backwards. i'm going backwards. i want to go back to 1979, 1978. literally. literally. so, we want we want to make the code go backwards, devolve to what it was earlier, you know, we we we've got a working version, which is fantastic. it's beautiful, and now we're going to go go back, learn more about the story, hopefully meet the original people,

00:22:33
get their stories, bring their stories in, you know, explain everything that happened, what their life was like, what ut was like in 1979, right? working on decwar. that's that's that's part of what we're doing. so we're we're going forwards with the the nextg decwar.js js and we're going backwards with the original decwar. very exciting stuff.
